# Microservices with SpringBoot, Kubernetes and OpenAPI

This is a sample project that demonstrates simple microservices implemented with SpringBoot and running in Kubernetes. Communication between services uses Java REST clients generated by [OpenAPI Generator](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator) based on OpenAPI specification file that is produced by each service. At the end we get a simple and generic way for inter-service communication.

## Table of contents

- [Microservices with SpringBoot, Kubernetes and OpenAPI](#microservices-with-springboot-kubernetes-and-openapi)
  - [1. How to run](#1-how-to-run)
    - [1.1 Create databases](#11-create-databases)
    - [1.2 Create Kubernetes cluster](#12-create-kubernetes-cluster)
    - [1.3 Configure K8s cluster](#13-configure-k8s-cluster)
      - [1.3.1 Configure SSL certificates for K8s ingress](#131-configure-ssl-certificates-for-k8s-ingress)
      - [1.3.2 Modify k8s_cluster_config.bash](#132-modify-k8s_cluster_configbash)
      - [1.3.3 Run k8s_cluster_config.bash script](#133-run-k8s_cluster_configbash-script)
    - [1.4 Install Java 17, Docker, Maven](#14-install-java-17-docker-maven)
    - [1.5 Configure k8s_redeploy.bash script](#15-configure-k8s_redeploybash-script)
      - [1.5.1 Copy k8s_redeploy.bash to your K8s cluster machine](#151-copy-k8s_redeploybash-to-your-k8s-cluster-machine)
      - [1.5.2 Modify k8s_redeploy.bash](#152-modify-k8s_redeploybash)
    - [1.6 Modify do_it_all.bash](#16-modify-do_it_allbash)
    - [1.7 Run do_it_all.bash](#17-run-do_it_allbash)
  - [2. Description](#2-description)
    - [2.1 Project hierarchy and build configuration](#21-project-hierarchy-and-build-configuration)
    - [2.2 SpringBoot configuration](#22-springboot-configuration)
    - [2.3 SpringDoc-OpenAPI configuration](#23-springdoc-openapi-configuration)
    - [2.4 OpenAPI configuration](#24-openapi-configuration)
    - [2.5 OpenAPI-Generator configuration](#25-openapi-generator-configuration)
    - [2.6 Docker images](#26-docker-images)
    - [2.7 Kubernetes deployment and configuration](#27-kubernetes-deployment-and-configuration)


## [1. How to run](#table-of-contents)

### [1.1 Create databases](#table-of-contents)

The project has two microservices (called Author service and Book service). Each service uses it's own RDB to store and access data. So first we have to create 2 databases:

This doc presumes MySQL DB but other RDB can be used as well.

Create new DB:
```shell
mysqladmin -p -u root create authorsdb
```

Open MySQL console:
```shell
mysql -u root -p
```

Create a new user with access to the new DB (make sure to replace 'YOUR_SECURE_PASSWORD' with a password for the new user):
```shell
GRANT ALL ON authorsdb.* TO 'authorsdbuser'@'%' IDENTIFIED BY 'YOUR_SECURE_PASSWORD';
```

You can use 'authorsdb' DB with user 'authorsdbuser' for the Author service and then create another DB in the same manner for the Book service.

### [1.2 Create Kubernetes cluster](#table-of-contents)

This project uses K3d Kubernetes cluster. Other K8s clusters can be used as well. Make sure port 30001 is forwarded to the cluster. For example you can create your K3d cluster with the following command:
```bash
k3d cluster create samplecluster -p "30000-30040:30000-30040@server:0"
```

Also make sure to install <b>kubectl</b>.

### [1.3 Configure K8s cluster](#table-of-contents) 

K8s cluster can be configured using the <i>./scripts/k8s_cluster_config.bash</i> script but before running it follow the steps below

#### [1.3.1 Configure SSL certificates for K8s ingress](#table-of-contents)

These certificates will be used by K8s nginx ingress controller for SSL connections for all configured services. k8s_cluster_config.bash script expects:

>/certs/privkey.pem

containing your private key

and 

>/certs/fullchain.pem

containing the full certificate chain (your certificate along all intermediate and root certificates) 

#### [1.3.2 Modify k8s_cluster_config.bash](#table-of-contents)

Replace:
 * DOCKER_REGISTRY_ADDRESS
 * DOCKER_REGISTRY_USER
 * DOCKER_REGISTRY_PASS

with details about your Docker registry.

Replace:
* DB_SERVER_ADDRESS
* AUTHOR_DB_NAME
* AUTHOR_DB_USER
* AUTHOR_DB_PASS
* BOOK_DB_NAME
* BOOK_DB_USER
* BOOK_DB_PASS 

with details about the databases created at step [1.1](#11-create-databases).

Note that k8s_cluster_config.bash creates a K8s secret that is used by the SpringBoot services to configure the DB access. The script configures the DB connection string and presumes that MySQL database is used. So if you use another DB vendor then update the script with the correct jdbc connection string.

#### [1.3.3 Run k8s_cluster_config.bash script](#table-of-contents)

```shell
./scripts/k8s_cluster_config.bash
```

The script will create Kubernetes secrets in your cluster that are used for:
- server SSL certificates
- accessing Docker repo where the Docker images for the services are kept
- configuring DB credentials and address

By using these K8s secrets all sensitive configuration data can be removed from the source code.

### [1.4 Install Java 17, Docker, Maven](#table-of-contents)

Install these tools on the machine where this project is built

### [1.5 Configure k8s_redeploy.bash script](#table-of-contents)

<i>./scripts/k8s_redeploy.bash</i> script is used for recreating K8s objects from K8s deployment files. Before running it follow the steps below

#### [1.5.1 Copy k8s_redeploy.bash to your K8s cluster machine](#table-of-contents)

Add the k8s.redeploy.bash in ~/scripts directory on your server where K8s cluster is running

#### [1.5.2 Modify k8s_redeploy.bash](#table-of-contents)

Replace:
* DOCKER_REGISTRY_ADDRESS - your Docker registry. E.g yourdockerregistry.com:5001
* YOUR_SERVER_HOSTNAME - your K8s cluster hostname. E.g yourdomain.com

### [1.6 Modify do_it_all.bash](#table-of-contents)

<i>./scripts/do_it_all.bash</i> is used for building, uploading, and redeploying the project.

Replace:
* YOUR_SERVER_ADDRESS:PORT_NUM - the address of your server. E.g https://yourdomain.com:30001
* APP_VERSION - app version. E.g 1.0. It will be used for API versioning in the generated OpenAPI spec
* DOCKER_REGISTRY_ADDRESS - your Docker registry. E.g yourdockerregistry.com:5001
* YOUR_SERVER_IP - the address of the server running the K8s cluster. It is used for uploading the K8s deployment files.
* YOUR_SERVER_PASS - root user password for your server. SSH should be enabled. Modify the script if you want to use a different user.

### [1.7 Run do_it_all.bash](#table-of-contents)

```shell
./scripts/do_it_all.bash
```

The script will do:

* 1. Run Maven and build Java artefacts
* 2. Build Docker images
* 3. Push Docker images to configured Docker registry
* 4. Upload Kubernetes deployment files
* 5. Delete and recreate Kubernetes objects

## [2. Description](#table-of-contents)

### [2.1 Project hierarchy and build configuration](#table-of-contents)

This project is built with Maven. It has several modules (described below) and a common parent project which keeps all shared dependencies' version and allows the modules to be built at once.

Maven modules:
* author-service - SpringBoot microservice that provide APIs for CRUD operations over authors. During build generates an OpenAPI specification with all provided APIs 
* author-service-client - uses [OpenAPI Generator](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator) to generate REST Java client from the OpenAPI spec file produced by author-service module
* book-service - SpringBoot microservice that provide APIs for CRUD operations over books. During build generates an OpenAPI specification with all provided APIs
* book-service-client - uses [OpenAPI Generator](https://github.com/OpenAPITools/openapi-generator) to generate REST Java client from the OpenAPI spec file produced by book-service module
* ui-service - SpringBoot microservice that combines functionality from the Author and Book microservices and uses author-service-client and book-service-client to call these microservices
* common - a shared library project

Key points:
* There is no source code dependency between the microservices projects. Still we have Java compilation checks for all remote APIs calls. 
* The autogenerated client projects do not depend on the services projects but only accept a single OpenAPI spec file as an input. This means that the microservices could be in a totally different source tree. This approach can be used for 3rd party services as well just get their OpenAPI specification.
* Generated OpenAPI specs are fully functional. No additional configuration is required to make them work. They can be directly imported in a tool like Postman and APIs can be called. This is possible because they are generated with the correct server URL.

### [2.2 SpringBoot configuration](#table-of-contents)

Since we're having our own parent Maven project

```xml
<parent>
   <groupId>com.pshterev.microservices</groupId>
   <artifactId>project-root</artifactId>
   <version>0.1</version>
</parent>
```

we can't set springboot-starter-parent as a parent. So this part is needed

```xml
<dependencyManagement>
   <dependencies>
      <dependency>
         <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
         <artifactId>spring-boot-dependencies</artifactId>
         <version>${spring.boot.version}</version>
         <type>pom</type>
         <scope>import</scope>
      </dependency>
   </dependencies>
</dependencyManagement>
```

to automatically resolve SpringBoot dependencies versions

and also this should be added to include SpringBoot code in the output JAR file

```xml
<execution>
   <goals>
      <goal>repackage</goal>
   </goals>
</execution>
```

in <b>spring-boot-maven-plugin</b> configuration

### [2.3 SpringDoc-OpenAPI configuration](#table-of-contents)

SpringDoc-OpenAPI Maven plugin is used to save the OpenAPI specification for all provided REST APIs

```xml
<plugin>
   <groupId>org.springdoc</groupId>
   <artifactId>springdoc-openapi-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <version>${spring.doc.maven.plugin.version}</version>
   <executions>
      <execution>
         <id>pre-integration-test</id>
         <goals>
            <goal>generate</goal>
         </goals>
      </execution>
   </executions>
   <configuration>
      <outputFileName>openapi.json</outputFileName>
      <outputDir>${project.basedir}/openapi-output</outputDir>
      <apiDocsUrl>http://localhost:30001/authors/v3/api-docs</apiDocsUrl>
   </configuration>
</plugin>
```
It's important to specify the output file and the correct api-docs URL - note the port and the first segment 'authors'. This is because we have the following config in <b>application.properties</b>

```properties
server.servlet.context-path=/authors
server.port=30001
```

Configuring the context-path to 'authors' means that Spring will expect an 'authors' as a 1st segment in the request URL for each API. And this is configured in this way because the Kubernetes ingress controller is configured to redirect request to different microservices based on the request URL. More specifically it redirects to Author microservice only request with URL that have a 1st segment equal to 'authors'. 
<br/>
<br/>

SpringDoc-OpenAPI plugin integrates with SpringBoot-Maven plugin which needs an additional configuration as well

```xml
<plugin>
   <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
   <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <version>${spring.boot.version}</version>
   ...
   <executions>
      <execution>
         <id>pre-integration-test</id>
         <goals>
            <goal>start</goal>
         </goals>
         <configuration>
            <profiles>local</profiles>
         </configuration>
      </execution>
      <execution>
         <id>post-integration-test</id>
         <goals>
            <goal>stop</goal>
         </goals>
      </execution>
      <execution>
         <goals>
            <goal>repackage</goal>
         </goals>
      </execution>
   </executions>
</plugin>
```

Note the <i>executions</i> section. These are required in order for the SpringDoc-OpenAPI plugin to access the api docs and produce the OpenAPI specification file. And this means that we're actually running the SpringBoot application during the build. Because of this note this important part

```xml
<execution>
   <id>pre-integration-test</id>
   <goals>
      <goal>start</goal>
   </goals>
   <configuration>
      <profiles>local</profiles>
   </configuration>
</execution>
```

It instructs the application to run the SpringBoot application with <b>local</b> Maven profile during build. And because of this configuration

```xml
<profiles>
   <profile>
      <id>local</id>
      <activation>
         <activeByDefault>true</activeByDefault>
      </activation>
      <properties>
         <spring-boot.run.profiles>local</spring-boot.run.profiles>
      </properties>
   </profile>
   <profile>
      <id>prod</id>
      <properties>
         <spring-boot.run.profiles>prod</spring-boot.run.profiles>
      </properties>
   </profile>
</profiles>
```

we're actually activating the <b>local</b> SpringBoot profile when <b>local</b> Maven profile is activated. Then to be able to run the SpringBoot application locally without accessing a remote database we have <b>application-local.properties</b> configuration file that is used with the <b>local</b> SpringBoot profile where the production database is replaced with an in-memory DB

```properties
spring.datasource.url=jdbc:h2:mem:db;DB_CLOSE_DELAY=-1
spring.datasource.driver-class-name=org.h2.Driver
spring.datasource.username=sa
spring.datasource.password=sa
```

while the <b>prod</b> SpringBoot profile has the production DB connection

```properties
spring.datasource.driver-class-name=com.mysql.cj.jdbc.Driver
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.dialect=org.hibernate.dialect.MySQL57Dialect
spring.jpa.properties.hibernate.jdbc.time_zone=UTC
```

and note that the jdbc connection string and DB credentials are configured not in the application.properties but with environment variables configured in the Kubernetes deployment files. More on that later.

Last related configuration bit is activating the <b>prod</b> SpringBoot profile when running the application in production environment and this is done in the <b>dockerfile</b>

```shell
ENTRYPOINT ["java","-jar","-Dspring.profiles.active=prod","/app.jar"]
```

### [2.4 OpenAPI configuration](#table-of-contents)

You could annotate your APIs with all kind of metadata such as descriptions, examples, errors, etc. In this project no additional data is added though for simplicity and still the SpringBoot microservices produce a fully functional OpenAPI spec. To configure the server URL in the OpenAPI spec we need this configuration

```java
@Bean
public OpenAPI customOpenAPI() throws MalformedURLException {
  return new OpenAPI()
          .addServersItem(new Server().url(new URL(new URL(serverAddress), SERVICE_PATH).toString()))
          .info(new Info().title("Author service").version(version));
}
```

Here we're adding a server with the real address of the server running the microservices. The <b>serverAddress</b> and <b>version</b> are Spring properties

```java
@Value("${serverAddress:https://default}")
private String serverAddress; // base server address for example 'example.com'
@Value("${version:0.0}")
private String version;
```

and these properties only makes sense when generating the OpenAPI spec which is when we're running the application during the build. So these values are coming from Maven

```xml
<plugin>
   <groupId>org.springframework.boot</groupId>
   <artifactId>spring-boot-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <version>${spring.boot.version}</version>
   <configuration>
      <mainClass>com.pshterev.microservices.authorservice.AuthorServiceApplication</mainClass>
      <systemPropertyVariables>
         <serverAddress>should_be_overriden</serverAddress>
         <version>should_be_overriden</version>
      </systemPropertyVariables>
   </configuration>
   ...
</plugin>
```

And are passed to Maven from the build scripts like this

```shell
./mvnw clean install -Pprod -Dspring-boot.run.jvmArguments="-DserverAddress=https://YOUR_SERVER_ADDRESS:PORT_NUM -Dversion=APP_VERSION" "$@"
```

Note that when running the application in production we don't use these properties so default values are used.

### [2.5 OpenAPI-Generator configuration](#table-of-contents)

There are empty *-client Maven modules that only run the OpenAPI-Generator. It accepts an OpenAPI spec json or yaml file and based on that spec the generator creates a whole Java project which contains a fully functional REST client. It also installs the created project as a Maven artifact. Whole OpenAPI-Generator config is

```xml
<plugin>
   <groupId>org.openapitools</groupId>
   <artifactId>openapi-generator-maven-plugin</artifactId>
   <version>${openapi.generator.maven.plugin.version}</version>
   <executions>
      <execution>
         <goals>
            <goal>generate</goal>
         </goals>
         <configuration>
            <inputSpec>${project.basedir}/../author-service/openapi-output/openapi.json</inputSpec>
            <generatorName>java</generatorName>
            <generateApiTests>false</generateApiTests>
            <generateModelTests>false</generateModelTests>
            <configOptions>
               <sourceFolder>src/gen/java/main</sourceFolder>
               <groupId>com.pshterev.microservices</groupId>
               <artifactId>author-service-client</artifactId>
               <invokerPackage>com.pshterev.microservices.authorservice.client.app</invokerPackage>
               <apiPackage>com.pshterev.microservices.authorservice.client.api</apiPackage>
               <modelPackage>com.pshterev.microservices.authorservice.client.model</modelPackage>
            </configOptions>
         </configuration>
      </execution>
   </executions>
</plugin>
```
Here the filepath to the openapi.json file is specified. Also note the artifact and group ids which are used for the Maven artifact and package names.

### [2.6 Docker images](#table-of-contents)

Each of the microservices - author, book and ui builds a Docker container image that is used to run in the Kubernetes cluster. The image is uploaded to the specified Docker registry. The Kubernetes cluster is configured to access this registry and required Docker images are pulled from it when creating the K8s objects. Docker image build and upload is done in <i>./scripts/build_docker_image.bash</i> which uses a <b>dockerfile</b> for image configuration.

### [2.7 Kubernetes deployment and configuration](#table-of-contents)

All K8s deployment files are in [<b>k8s</b>](https://github.com/pavlinshterev/springboot_k8s_openapi/tree/main/k8s) directory. It contains:
 * nginx configuration and deployment in [<b>ingress-controller</b>](https://github.com/pavlinshterev/springboot_k8s_openapi/tree/main/k8s/ingress-controller) directory
 * <i>microservices</i> namespace creation
 * one deployment file for each service
 * ingress deployment file

author, book and ui microservices deployment files are pretty similar. Here is how DB configuration is done

```yaml
env:
- name: SPRING_DATASOURCE_URL
  valueFrom:
    secretKeyRef:
      name: db-creds
      key: author_db_conn
- name: SPRING_DATASOURCE_USERNAME
  valueFrom:
    secretKeyRef:
      name: db-creds
      key: author_db_user
- name: SPRING_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD
  valueFrom:
    secretKeyRef:
      name: db-creds
      key: author_db_pass
```

Spring checks these environment variables and configures the datasource. The values are taken from db-creds secret that we previously created and configured in step: [1.3.3](#133-run-k8s_cluster_configbash-script).

{{AUTHOR_DOCKER_IMAGE}} is replaced in <i>k8s_redeploy.bash</i>

```shell
cat author-service-deployment.yaml | sed "s/{{AUTHOR_DOCKER_IMAGE}}/DOCKER_REGISTRY_ADDRESS\/author-service-docker/g" | kubectl apply -f -
```

Again this is to keep private info out of the source code.

Here is the K8s Service configuration

```yaml
kind: Service
metadata:
  creationTimestamp: null
  labels:
    app: author-service
  name: author-service
  namespace: microservices
spec:
  ports:
  - port: 8001
    protocol: TCP
    targetPort: 30001
  selector:
    app: author-service-app
  type: ClusterIP
status:
  loadBalancer: {}
```

The k8s service object for the Author microservice is configured to listen on port 8001 and redirect to port 30001 on the pod which should match the port in SpringBoot configuration - <b>application.properties</b>

```properties
server.port=30001
```
And finally let's look at the ingress configuration

```yaml
spec:
  tls:
  - hosts:
    - {{HOSTNAME}}
    secretName: tls-certs
  rules:
  - host: {{HOSTNAME}}
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /books
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
          service:
            name: book-service
            port: 
              number: 8001
  - host: {{HOSTNAME}}
    http:
      paths:
        - path: /authors
          pathType: Prefix
          backend:
            service:
              name: author-service
              port:
                number: 8001
  - host: {{HOSTNAME}}
    http:
      paths:
      - path: /ui
        pathType: Prefix
        backend:
          service:
            name: ui-service
            port: 
              number: 8001
```

In the beginning the ingress controller is configured to use <b>tls-certs</b> secret where it will look for certificates to configure the server SSL certificate. Also this is how a specific URL path is mapped to a K8s service to which the request should be routed.

Finally in <i>ingress-controller/services.yaml</i> the load balancer is configured to listen on machine port 30001

```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: ingress-nginx-controller-lb
  namespace: ingress-nginx
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  ports:
    - name: https
      port: 30001
      targetPort: https
  selector:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: ingress-nginx
    app.kubernetes.io/instance: ingress-nginx
    app.kubernetes.io/component: controller
```

Note that machine port (30001) could be a totally different than the port on which the SpringBoot application(Tomcat web server) runs in the container defined in the <b>application.properties</b> file

```properties
server.port=30001
```
But for simplicity these ports match in this example.